Document codebase rendering concepts (#7596)
withastro/astro: packages/astro/src/core/render/README.md

# `core/render`

This directory contains most of Astro's high-level rendering APIs, including `renderPage`, `createRenderContext`, etc.

- For rendering an Astro file, see [src/runtime/server/](../../runtime/server/).
- For rendering an endpoint, see [src/core/endpoint/](../endpoint/).

## Concepts

The codebase has a few abstractions for rendering:

### `RenderContext`

> Each render (page or endpoint) requires a `RenderContext` that contains information of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each render (page or endpoint) requires a `RenderContext` that contains:
```

- The `Request` object
- The matched `route`
- The matched `pathname` (without the `base`)
- The route `params` and `props`
- Additional `styles`, `links`, `scripts`
- And more!

> It is agnostic to what's being rendered and should only contain per-request information.

Reviewer: The second half of this seems important and sets up a pattern echoed in the Environment section, so I’d suggest breaking it onto a new line, and maybe some consistent styling between sections:

```suggestion
The `RenderContext` is agnostic to what's being rendered. 

**Permitted state:** `RenderContext` should only contain per-request information.
```

### `Environment`

Every app (dev and prod) has one `Environment`. It contains a subset of the Astro `settings`, `config`, and `routes` information needed for Astro's runtime to work.

> In dev, the `Environment` (aka `DevelopmentEnvironment`) is derived from the `settings`, `config`, and `routes` information directly as it's available then. In prod, it can only be derived from the `SSRManifest` as an intermediate layer so to keep the build output lean.

Reviewer: Suggesting reworking this to improve the clarity a bit:

```suggestion
In dev, all of `settings`, `config`, and `routes` are available, so the `Environment` (aka `DevelopmentEnvironment`) is derived directly from them. In prod, the `Environment` is derived from the `SSRManifest`, an intermediate layer that helps keep the build output lean.
```

> The `Environment` should only contain the global state for all the requests.

Reviewer: And then this can match the styling above:

```suggestion
**Permitted State:** The `Environment` should only contain the global state shared across all requests.
```

### `SSRManifest`

> An `SSRManifest` is created during a build to save information needed for creating an `Environment` during the runtime start-up. The values should be serializable (`buildManifest`) and deserializable (`deserializeManifest`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `SSRManifest` is created during a build to save information needed to create an `Environment` during runtime start-up. The values should be serializable (`buildManifest`) and deserializable (`deserializeManifest`).
```

> The serialized string is inlined to the server output and can be usually read from the compiled module's `manifest` export.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The serialized string is inlined in the server output and can usually be read from the compiled module's `manifest` export.
```

### `SSRResult`

> The `SSRResult` is used by the public rendering APIs at [src/runtime/server/](../../runtime/server/). At the top level, it is created by `renderPage` and passed down to the public rendering APIs. It is also often used in non-Astro pages, like `.mdx` and `.md`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SSRResult` is used by the public rendering APIs at [`src/runtime/server/`](../../runtime/server/). At the top level, it is created by `renderPage` and passed down to the public rendering APIs. It is also often used in non-Astro pages, like `.mdx` and `.md`.
```

- For rendering an endpoint, see [src/core/endpoint/](../endpoint/).

## Concepts

The codebase has a few abstractions for rendering:

### `RenderContext`

Each render (page or endpoint) requires a `RenderContext` that contains:

- The `Request` object
- The matched `route`
- The matched `pathname` (without the `base`)
- The route `params` and `props`
- Additional `styles`, `links`, `scripts`
- And more!

The `RenderContext` is agnostic to what's being rendered. 

**Permitted state:** `RenderContext` should only contain per-request information.

### `Environment`

Every app (dev and prod) has one `Environment`. It contains a subset of the Astro `settings`, `config`, and `routes` information needed for Astro's runtime to work.

In dev, all of `settings`, `config`, and `routes` are available, so the `Environment` (aka `DevelopmentEnvironment`) is derived directly from them. In prod, the `Environment` is derived from the `SSRManifest`, an intermediate layer that helps keep the build output lean.

**Permitted state:** `Environment` should only contain the global state shared across all requests.

### `SSRManifest`

> An `SSRManifest` is created during a build to save information needed to create an `Environment` during runtime start-up. The values should be serializable (`buildManifest`) and deserializable (`deserializeManifest`).

Reviewer 2: Considering this documentation, we should rename this function to `serializeManifest`. What do you think? (not in this PR)

Author: Yeah we should definitely do that. Especially that the serialization part is quite spreaded, making both side-by-side would be good long term.
